You know, you're driving down a street and you get the address and
you stop at a house and it's in a beautiful neighbourhood and you
walk into the house and it's like an SRO on the downtown east side.
Working on the North Shore is, I love it. It's amazing because it's
such a diverse population that I'm working with. I've worked in the downtown
east side prior for multiple years and the North Shore is my home
and I had an opportunity to work here.
The people that I work with really vary. They can be
people that are working five days a week, raising families, people that
live in big mansions in the British properties or people that are living
in a homeless camp. The majority of my referrals come from Lionsgate Hospital
Emergency Department when people have presented with an overdose or somebody
presents and is really high risk for overdose due to substances that they're
using. When I first phone people or first meet people, some people are,
they feel ashamed right away. They're like, oh no,
how was I referred to you? And they're scared and they feel like
I'm going to judge them. So I have to spit out my spiel really,
really fast so that I can keep them on the phone or keep
them engaged. One of the first things I say is I'm not here
to tell you what to do. I'm here to honour where you're at
in your journey and support you and I can support you in any
way that you need. My mandate is to connect people to care,
but for different people that looks very different.
For some people that is connecting them to counseling or
for some people that's connecting them to detox and treatment, other people
need a primary care clinic or access to OAT, which is opiate agonist therapy.
And some people just want some harm reduction education and access to an
aloxone kit. My mandate is to connect people to services and we're so
restricted with services. And there's a lot of people that don't want to
acknowledge that there is addiction on the North Shore, that there's addiction
on almost every street on the North Shore. And it's so stigmatized and
it's much more behind closed doors. I was really quite blown away myself.
I've been a resident in the North Shore for 15 years.
I work with a lot of partners on the North Shore,
but some of the services that I feel should be designed for people
who use substances, they say we'll call back when they're not using anymore.
And that's not really useful. Stigma has a really huge impact on clients
that I work with. I've noticed sometimes a client would
reach out to a care provider, whether that's a doctor or a hospital
or a primary care clinic or somewhere, because they're feeling dope sick,
for example, and they're not treated with care and respect always.
Their symptoms aren't treated. They're told, go sleep it off, go have a
sandwich. But if their symptoms weren't related to substance use, they would
be treated for their symptoms. We need to
treat people with dignity and respect and compassion,
no matter where they're at in their journey with addiction or substance
use. When I first started working on the North Shore, I was based
out of stepping stones. And I do personally have lived and living experience.
And I remember I was just, I was sitting in the waiting room
there and there was this crickety little locker thing in the corner and
I went to open it and it made this really loud creaking sound
and it's a really quiet office space. And I was like,
what is in this thing? And it was harm reduction supplies that were
in there. And I just imagine myself as a patient of the clinic
wanting to access those harm reduction supplies, but not wanting people
to know I was accessing harm reduction supplies, because I know at times
in my own addiction, I didn't want to be honest about where I
was at with my using. And I just kind of pictured myself like sneaking
over the cupboard, but not making it make noise. And I brought it
to the team there and now they have
a display shelf with much more accessible harm reduction supplies. And I
thought that was a great way that they address stigma there. If we
really want to address stigma, we can't beat around the bush about it,
right? Like we've got to be really upfront and honest and point out
the flaws in the system and where things aren't working. Then we can
actually provide some change, right? And you know, harm reduction philosophy
is, it is newer, but we need to get it out there because
it's working. And in a time when so many people are dying,
we've got to do whatever we can do. And I just hope people
are open to learning more about reducing stigma and
becoming less ignorant in a sense.